---
title: Haystack 2.1.2
description: Release notes for Haystack 2.1.2
toc: True
date: 2024-05-16
last_updated:  2024-05-16
tags: ["Release Notes"]
link: https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack/releases/tag/v2.1.2
---

## v2.1.2

### ⚡️ Enhancement Notes

-   Enforce JSON mode on OpenAI LLM-based evaluators so that they always return valid JSON output. This is to ensure that the output is always in a consistent format, regardless of the input.

### 🐛 Bug Fixes

-  `FaithfullnessEvaluator` and `ContextRelevanceEvaluator` now return `0` instead of `NaN` when applied to an empty context or empty statements.
-   Azure generators components fixed, they were missing the `@component` decorator.
-   Updates the `from_dict` method of `SentenceTransformersTextEmbedder`, `SentenceTransformersDocumentEmbedder`, `NamedEntityExtractor`, `SentenceTransformersDiversityRanker` and `LocalWhisperTranscriber` to allow `None `as a valid value for device when deserializing from a YAML file. This allows a deserialized pipeline to auto-determine what device to use using the `ComponentDevice.resolve_device` logic.
-   Improves/fixes type serialization of PEP 585 types (e.g. `list[Document]`, and their nested version). This improvement enables better serialization of generics and nested types and improves/fixes matching of `list[X]` and List[X]` types in component connections after serialization.
-   Fixed (de)serialization of `NamedEntityExtractor`. Includes updated tests verifying these fixes when `NamedEntityExtractor` is used in pipelines.
-   The `include_outputs_from` parameter in `Pipeline.run` correctly returns outputs of components with multiple outputs.

