---
title: Haystack 2.13.2
description: Release notes for Haystack 2.13.2
toc: True
date: 2025-05-09
last_updated: 2025-05-09
tags: ["Release Notes"]
link: https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack/releases/tag/v2.13.2
---

## âš¡ï¸ Enhancement Notes

-   Updated pipeline execution logic to use a new utility method `_deepcopy_with_exceptions`, which attempts to deep copy an object and safely falls back to the original object if copying fails. Additionally `_deepcopy_with_exceptions` skips deep-copying of `Component`, `Tool`, and `Toolset` instances when used as runtime parameters. This prevents errors and unintended behavior caused by trying to deepcopy objects that contain non-copyable attributes (e.g. Jinja2 templates, clients). Previously, standard `deepcopy` was used on inputs and outputs which occasionally lead to errors since certain Python objects cannot be deepcopied.

## ðŸ› Bug Fixes

-   Make internal tool conversion in the HuggingFaceAPICompatibleChatGenerator compatible with huggingface_hub\>=0.31.0. In the huggingface_hub library, `arguments` attribute of `ChatCompletionInputFunctionDefinition` has been renamed to `parameters`. Our implementation is compatible with both the legacy version and the new one.
-   The `HuggingFaceAPIChatGenerator` now checks the type of the `arguments` variable in the tool calls returned by the Hugging Face API. If `arguments` is a JSON string, it is parsed into a dictionary. Previously, the `arguments` type was not checked, which sometimes led to failures later in the tool workflow.
