---
title: Haystack 2.16.0
description: Release notes for Haystack 2.16.0
toc: True
date: 2025-07-29
last_updated: 2025-07-29
tags: ["Release Notes"]
link: https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack/releases/tag/v2.16.0
---

## ⭐️ Highlights

### 🧠 Agent Breakpoints

This release introduces **Agent Breakpoints**, a powerful new feature that enhances debugging and observability when working with Haystack Agents. You can pause execution mid-run by inserting breakpoints in the Agent or its tools to inspect internal state and resume execution seamlessly. This brings fine-grained control to agent development and significantly improves traceability during complex interactions.

```python
from haystack.dataclasses.breakpoints import AgentBreakpoint, Breakpoint
from haystack.dataclasses import ChatMessage

chat_generator_breakpoint = Breakpoint(
    component_name="chat_generator", 
    visit_count=0, 
    snapshot_file_path="debug_snapshots"
)
agent_breakpoint = AgentBreakpoint(break_point=chat_generator_breakpoint, agent_name='calculator_agent')

response = agent.run(
    messages=[ChatMessage.from_user("What is 7 * (4 + 2)?")],
    break_point=agent_breakpoint
)
```

### 🖼️ Multimodal Pipelines and Agents

You can now blend text and image capabilities across generation, indexing, and retrieval in Haystack.

* **New `ImageContent` Dataclass**: A dedicated structure to store image data along with `base64_image`, `mime_type`, `detail`, and `metadata`.

* **Image-Aware Chat Generators**: Image inputs are now supported in `OpenAIChatGenerator`

```python
from haystack.dataclasses import ImageContent, ChatMessage
from haystack.components.generators.chat import OpenAIChatGenerator

image_url = "https://cdn.britannica.com/79/191679-050-C7114D2B/Adult-capybara.jpg"
image_content = ImageContent.from_url(image_url)

message = ChatMessage.from_user(
    content_parts=["Describe the image in short.", image_content]
)

llm = OpenAIChatGenerator(model="gpt-4o-mini")
print(llm.run([message])["replies"][0].text)
```

* **Powerful Multimodal Components**:

  * `PDFToImageContent`, `ImageFileToImageContent`, `DocumentToImageContent`: Convert PDFs, image files, and Documents into `ImageContent` objects.
  * `LLMDocumentContentExtractor`: Extract text from images using a vision-enabled LLM.
  * `SentenceTransformersDocumentImageEmbedder`: Generate embeddings from image-based documents using models like CLIP.
  * `DocumentLengthRouter`: Route documents based on textual content length—ideal for distinguishing scanned PDFs from text-based ones.
  * `DocumentTypeRouter`: Route documents automatically based on MIME type metadata.

* **Prompt Building with Image Support**: The `ChatPromptBuilder` now supports templates with embedded images, enabling dynamic multimodal prompt creation.

With these additions, you can now build multimodal agents and RAG pipelines that reason over both text and visual content, unlocking richer interactions and retrieval capabilities.

👉 Learn more about multimodality in our [Introduction to Multimodal Text Generation](https://haystack.deepset.ai/cookbook/multimodal_intro).

## 🚀 New Features

- Add `to_dict` and `from_dict` to `ByteStream` so it is consistent with our other dataclasses in having serialization and deserialization methods.

- Add `to_dict` and `from_dict` to classes `StreamingChunk`, `ToolCallResult`, `ToolCall`, `ComponentInfo`, and `ToolCallDelta` to make it consistent with our other dataclasses in having serialization and deserialization methods.

- Added the `tool_invoker_kwargs` param to `Agent` so additional kwargs can be passed to the `ToolInvoker` like `max_workers` and `enable_streaming_callback_passthrough`.

- `ChatPromptBuilder` now supports special string templates in addition to a list of `ChatMessage` objects. This new format is more flexible and allows structured parts like images to be included in the templatized `ChatMessage`.

    ```python 
    from haystack.components.builders import ChatPromptBuilder 
    from haystack.dataclasses.chat_message import ImageContent
    
    template = """
    {% message role="user" %}
    Hello! I am {{user_name}}. 
    What's the difference between the following images? 
    {% for image in images %}
    {{ image | templatize_part }}
    {% endfor %}
    {% endmessage %}
    """ 

    images=[
        ImageContent.from_file_path("apple-fruit.jpg"),
        ImageContent.from_file_path("apple-logo.jpg")
    ]
    
    builder = ChatPromptBuilder(template=template) builder.run(user_name="John", images=images)
    ```

- Added convenience class methods to the `ImageContent` dataclass to create `ImageContent` objects from file paths and URLs.

- Added multiple converters to help convert image data between different formats:
 - `DocumentToImageContent`: Converts documents sourced from PDF and image files into `ImageContents`.
 - `ImageFileToImageContent`: Converts image files to `ImageContent` objects.
 - `ImageFileToDocument`: Converts image file references into empty `Document` objects with associated metadata.
 - `PDFToImageContent`: Converts PDF files to `ImageContent` objects.

- Chat Messages with the user role can now include images using the new `ImageContent` dataclass. We've added image support to `OpenAIChatGenerator`, and plan to support more model providers over time.

- Raise a warning when a pipeline can no longer proceed because **all** remaining components are blocked from running **and** no expected pipeline outputs have been produced. This scenario can occur legitimately. For example, in pipelines with mutually exclusive branches where some components are intentionally blocked. To help avoid false positives, the check ensures that none of the expected outputs (as defined by `Pipeline().outputs()`) have been generated during the current run.

- Added `source_id_meta_field` and `split_id_meta_field` to `SentenceWindowRetriever` for customizable metadata field names. Added `raise_on_missing_meta_fields` to control whether a ValueError is raised if any of the documents at runtime are missing the required meta fields (set to True by default). If False, then the documents missing the meta field will be skipped when retrieving their windows, but the original document will still be included in the results.

- Add a `ComponentInfo` dataclass to the `haystack.dataclasses` module. This dataclass is used to store information about the component. We pass it to `StreamingChunk` so we can tell from which component a stream is coming from.

- Pass the `component_info` to the `StreamingChunk` in the `OpenAIChatGenerator`, `AzureOpenAIChatGenerator`, `HuggingFaceAPIChatGenerator` and `HuggingFaceLocalChatGenerator`.

- Added the `enable_streaming_callback_passthrough` to the `ToolInvoker` init, run and run_async methods. If set to True the ToolInvoker will try and pass the `streaming_callback` function to a tool's invoke method only if the tool's invoke method has `streaming_callback` in its signature.

- Added dedicated `finish_reason` field to `StreamingChunk` class to improve type safety and enable sophisticated streaming UI logic. The field uses a `FinishReason` type alias with standard values: "stop", "length", "tool_calls", "content_filter", plus Haystack-specific value "tool_call_results" (used by ToolInvoker to indicate tool execution completion).

- Updated `ToolInvoker` component to use the new `finish_reason` field when streaming tool results. The component now sets `finish_reason="tool_call_results"` in the final streaming chunk to indicate that tool execution has completed, while maintaining backward compatibility by also setting the value in `meta["finish_reason"]`.

- Added new `HuggingFaceTEIRanker` component to enable reranking with Text Embeddings Inference (TEI) API. This component supports both self-hosted Text Embeddings Inference services and Hugging Face Inference Endpoints.

- Added a raise_on_failure boolean parameter to OpenAIDocumentEmbedder and AzureOpenAIDocumentEmbedder. If set to True then the component will raise an exception when there is an error with the API request. It is set to False by default to so the previous behavior of logging an exception and continuing is still the default.

- `ToolInvoker` now executes `tool_calls` in parallel for both sync and async mode.

- Add `AsyncHFTokenStreamingHandler` for async streaming support in `HuggingFaceLocalChatGenerator`

- For `HuggingFaceAPIGenerator` and `HuggingFaceAPIChatGenerator` all additional key, value pairs passed in `api_params` are now passed to the initializations of the underlying Inference Clients. This allows passing of additional parameters to the clients like `timeout`, `headers`, `provider`, etc. This means we now can easily specify a different inference provider by passing the `provider` key in `api_params`.

- Updated `StreamingChunk` to add the fields `tool_calls`, `tool_call_result`, `index`, and `start` to make it easier to format the stream in a streaming callback.


## ⬆️ Upgrade Notes

- `HuggingFaceAPIGenerator` might no longer work with the Hugging Face Inference API. As of July 2025, the Hugging Face Inference API no longer offers generative models that support the `text_generation` endpoint. Generative models are now only available through providers that support the `chat_completion` endpoint. As a result, the `HuggingFaceAPIGenerator` component might not work with the Hugging Face Inference API. It still works with Hugging Face Inference Endpoints and self-hosted TGI instances. To use generative models via Hugging Face Inference API, please use the `HuggingFaceAPIChatGenerator` component, which supports the `chat_completion` endpoint.

- All parameters of the `Pipeline.draw()` and `Pipeline.show()` methods must now be specified as keyword arguments. Example: 

```python
pipeline.draw(
    path="output.png",
    server_url="https://custom-server.com",
    params=None,
    timeout=30,
    super_component_expansion=False
)
```

- The deprecated `async_executor` parameter has been removed from the `ToolInvoker` class. Please use the `max_workers` parameter instead and a `ThreadPoolExecutor` with these workers will be created automatically for parallel tool invocations.

- The deprecated `State` class has been removed from the `haystack.dataclasses` module. The `State` class is now part of the `haystack.components.agents` module.

- Remove the `deserialize_value_with_schema_legacy` function from the `base_serialization` module. This function was used to deserialize `State` objects created with Haystack 2.14.0 or older. Support for the old serialization format is removed in Haystack 2.16.0.


## ⚡️ Enhancement Notes

- Add `guess_mime_type` parameter to `Bytestream.from_file_path()`

- Add the init parameter `skip_empty_documents` to the `DocumentSplitter` component. The default value is True. Setting it to False can be useful when downstream components in the Pipeline (like `LLMDocumentContentExtractor`) can extract text from non-textual documents.

- Test that our type validation and connection validation works with builtin python types introduced in 3.9. We found that these types were already supported, we just now add explicit tests for them.

- We relaxed the requirement that in `ToolCallDelta` (introduced in Haystack 2.15) which required the parameters arguments or name to be populated to be able to create a `ToolCallDelta` dataclass. We remove this requirement to be more in line with OpenAI's SDK and since this was causing errors for some hosted versions of open source models following OpenAI's SDK specification.

- Added `return_embedding` parameter inside `InMemoryDocumentStore::init` method.

- Updated methods `bm25_retrieval`, and `filter_documents` to use `self.return_embedding` to determine whether embeddings are returned.

- Updated tests (test_in_memory & test_in_memory_embedding_retriever) to reflect the changes in the `InMemoryDocumentStore`.

- Added a new `deserialize_component_inplace` function to handle generic component deserialization that works with any component type.

- Made doc-parser a core dependency since ComponentTool that uses it is one of the core Tool components.

- Make the `PipelineBase().validate_input` method public so users can use it with the confidence that it won't receive breaking changes without warning. This method is useful for checking that all required connections in a pipeline have a connection and is automatically called in the run method of Pipeline. It is being exposed as public for users who would like to call this method before runtime to validate the pipeline.

- For component run Datadog tracing, set the span resource name to the component name instead of the operation name.

- Added a `trust_remote_code` parameter to the `SentenceTransformersSimilarityRanker` component. When set to True, this enables execution of custom models and scripts hosted on the Hugging Face Hub.

- Add a new parameter `require_tool_call_ids` to `ChatMessage.to_openai_dict_format`. The default is `True`, for compatibility with OpenAI's Chat API: if the `id` field is missing in a Tool Call, an error is raised. Using `False` is useful for shallow OpenAI-compatible APIs, where the `id` field is not required.

- Haystack's core modules are now [["type complete"](https://typing.python.org/en/latest/guides/libraries.html#how-much-of-my-library-needs-types)](https://typing.python.org/en/latest/guides/libraries.html#how-much-of-my-library-needs-types), meaning that all function parameters and return types are explicitly annotated. This increases the usefulness of the newly added `py.typed` marker and sidesteps differences in type inference between the various type checker implementations.

- Refactors the `HuggingFaceAPIChatGenerator` to use the util method `_convert_streaming_chunks_to_chat_message`. This is to help with being consistent for how we convert `StreamingChunks` into a final `ChatMessage`.

- We also add `ComponentInfo` to the `StreamingChunks` made in `HuggingFaceGenerator`, and `HugginFaceLocalGenerator` so we can tell from which component a stream is coming from.

- If only system messages are provided as input a warning will be logged to the user indicating that this likely not intended and that they should probably also provide user messages.


## 🐛 Bug Fixes

- Fix `_convert_streaming_chunks_to_chat_message` which is used to convert Haystack `StreamingChunks` into a Haystack `ChatMessage`. This fixes the scenario where one `StreamingChunk` contains two `ToolCallDeltas` in `StreamingChunk.tool_calls`. With this fix this correctly saves both `ToolCallDeltas` whereas before they were overwriting each other. This only occurs with some LLM providers like Mistral (and not OpenAI) due to how the provider returns tool calls.

- Fixed a bug in the `print_streaming_chunk` utility function that prevented tool call name from being printed.

- Fixed the `to_dict` and `from_dict` of `ToolInvoker` to properly serialize the `streaming_callback` init parameter.

- Fix bug where if `raise_on_failure=False` and an error occurs mid-batch that the following embeddings would be paired with the wrong documents.

- Fix `component_invoker` used by `ComponentTool` to work when a dataclass like `ChatMessage` is directly passed to `component_tool.invoke(...)`. Previously this would either cause an error or silently skip your input.

- Fixed a bug in the `LLMMetadataExtractor` that occurred when processing `Document` objects with `None` or empty string content. The component now gracefully handles these cases by marking such documents as failed and providing an appropriate error message in their metadata, without attempting an LLM call.

- **RecursiveDocumentSplitter** now generates a unique `Document.id` for every chunk. The meta fields (`split_id`, `parent_id`, etc.) are populated _[[before](https://chat.mistral.ai/chat)]()_ `Document` creation, so the hash used for `id` generation is always unique.

- In `ConditionalRouter` fixed the `to_dict` and `from_dict` methods to properly handle the case when `output_type` is a List of types or a List of strings. This occurs when a user specifies a route in `ConditionalRouter` to have multiple outputs.

- Fix serialization of `GeneratedAnswer` when `ChatMessage` objects are nested in `meta`.

- Fix the serialization of `ComponentTool` and `Tool` when specifying `outputs_to_string`. Previously an error occurred on deserialization right after serializing if `outputs_to_string` is not None.

- When calling `set_output_types` we now also check that the decorator `@component.output_types` is not present on the `run_async` method of a Component. Previously we only checked that the `Component.run` method did not possess the decorator.

- Fix type comparison in schema validation by replacing `is not` with `!=` when checking the type `List[ChatMessage]`. This prevents false mismatches due to Python's `is` operator comparing object identity instead of equality.

- Re-export symbols in `__init__.py` files. This ensures that short imports like `from haystack.components.builders import ChatPromptBuilder` work equivalently to `from haystack.components.builders.chat_prompt_builder import ChatPromptBuilder`, without causing errors or warnings in mypy/Pylance.
- The `SuperComponent` class can now correctly serialize and deserialize a `SuperComponent` based on an async pipeline. Previously, the `SuperComponent` class always assumed the underlying pipeline was synchronous.


## ⚠️ Deprecation Notes

- `async_executor` parameter in `ToolInvoker` is deprecated in favor of `max_workers` parameter and will be removed in Haystack 2.16.0. You can use `max_workers` parameter to control the number of threads used for parallel tool calling.


## 💙  Big thank you to everyone who contributed to this release!

@Amnah199  @RafaelJohn9  @anakin87  @bilgeyucel  @davidsbatista @julian-risch @kanenorman @kr1shnasomani  @mathislucka  @mpangrazzi  @sjr  @srishti-git1110
