---
title: Haystack 2.2.0
description: Release notes for Haystack 2.2.0
toc: True
date: 2024-06-03
last_updated:  2024-06-03
tags: ["Release Notes"]
link: https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack/releases/tag/v2.2.0
---

### Highlights

The <span class="title-ref">Multiplexer</span> component proved to be hard to explain and to understand. After reviewing its use cases, the documentation was rewritten and the component was renamed to <span class="title-ref">BranchJoiner</span> to better explain its functionalities.

Add the 'OPENAI_TIMEOUT' and 'OPENAI_MAX_RETRIES' to the OpenAI components.

### ⬆️ Upgrade Notes

-   <span class="title-ref">BranchJoiner</span> has the very same interface as <span class="title-ref">Multiplexer</span>. To upgrade your code, just rename any occurrence of <span class="title-ref">Multiplexer</span> to <span class="title-ref">BranchJoiner</span> and ajdust the imports accordingly.

### 🚀 New Features

-   Add <span class="title-ref">BranchJoiner</span> to eventually replace <span class="title-ref">Multiplexer</span>
-   <span class="title-ref">AzureOpenAIGenerator</span> and <span class="title-ref">AzureOpenAIChatGenerator</span> can now be configured passing a timeout for the underlying <span class="title-ref">AzureOpenAI</span> client.

### ⚡️ Enhancement Notes

-   <span class="title-ref">ChatPromptBuilder</span> now supports changing its template at runtime. This allows you to define a default template and then change it based on your needs at runtime.
-   If an LLM-based evaluator (e.g., <span class="title-ref">Faithfulness</span> or <span class="title-ref">ContextRelevance</span>) is initialised with <span class="title-ref">raise_on_failure=False</span>, and if a call to an LLM fails or an LLM outputs an invalid JSON, the score of the sample is set to <span class="title-ref">NaN</span> instead of raising an exception. The user is notified with a warning indicating the number of requests that failed.
-   Adds inference mode to model call of the ExtractiveReader. This prevents gradients from being calculated during inference time in pytorch.
-   The <span class="title-ref">DocumentCleaner</span> class has the optional attribute <span class="title-ref">keep_id</span> that if set to True it keeps the document ids unchanged after cleanup.
-   DocumentSplitter now has an optional split_threshold parameter. Use this parameter if you want to rather not split inputs that are only slightly longer than the allowed split_length. If when chunking one of the chunks is smaller than the split_threshold, the chunk will be concatenated with the previous one. This avoids having too small chunks that are not meaningful.
-   Re-implement <span class="title-ref">InMemoryDocumentStore</span> BM25 search with incremental indexing by avoiding re-creating the entire inverse index for every new query. This change also removes the dependency on <span class="title-ref">haystack_bm25</span>. Please refer to \[PR #7549\](<https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack/pull/7549>) for the full context.
-   Improved MIME type management by directly setting MIME types on ByteStreams, enhancing the overall handling and routing of different file types. This update makes MIME type data more consistently accessible and simplifies the process of working with various document formats.
-   <span class="title-ref">PromptBuilder</span> now supports changing its template at runtime (e.g. for Prompt Engineering). This allows you to define a default template and then change it based on your needs at runtime.
-   Now you can set the timeout and max_retries parameters on OpenAI components by setting the 'OPENAI_TIMEOUT' and 'OPENAI_MAX_RETRIES' environment vars or passing them at \_\_init\_\_.
-   The <span class="title-ref">DocumentJoiner</span> component's <span class="title-ref">run</span> method now accepts a <span class="title-ref">top_k</span> parameter, allowing users to specify the maximum number of documents to return at query time. This fixes issue #7702.
-   Enforce JSON mode on OpenAI LLM-based evaluators so that the they always return valid JSON output. This is to ensure that the output is always in a consistent format, regardless of the input.
-   Make <span class="title-ref">warm_up()</span> usage consistent across the codebase.
-   Create a class hierarchy for pipeline classes, and move the run logic into the child class. Preparation work for introducing multiple run stratgegies.
-   Make the <span class="title-ref">SerperDevWebSearch</span> more robust when <span class="title-ref">snippet</span> is not present in the request response.
-   Make SparseEmbedding a dataclass, this makes it easier to use the class with Pydantic
-   \`HTMLToDocument\`: change the HTML conversion backend from <span class="title-ref">boilerpy3</span> to <span class="title-ref">trafilatura</span>, which is more robust and better maintained.

### ⚠️ Deprecation Notes

-   <span class="title-ref">Mulitplexer</span> is now deprecated.
-   <span class="title-ref">DynamicChatPromptBuilder</span> has been deprecated as <span class="title-ref">ChatPromptBuilder</span> fully covers its functionality. Use <span class="title-ref">ChatPromptBuilder</span> instead.
-   <span class="title-ref">DynamicPromptBuilder</span> has been deprecated as <span class="title-ref">PromptBuilder</span> fully covers its functionality. Use <span class="title-ref">PromptBuilder</span> instead.
-   The following parameters of <span class="title-ref">HTMLToDocument</span> are ignored and will be removed in Haystack 2.4.0: <span class="title-ref">extractor_type</span> and <span class="title-ref">try_others</span>.

### 🐛 Bug Fixes

-   <span class="title-ref">FaithfullnessEvaluator</span> and <span class="title-ref">ContextRelevanceEvaluator</span> now return <span class="title-ref">0</span> instead of <span class="title-ref">NaN</span> when applied to an empty context or empty statements.
-   Azure generators components fixed, they were missing the <span class="title-ref">@component</span> decorator.
-   Updates the from_dict method of SentenceTransformersTextEmbedder, SentenceTransformersDocumentEmbedder, NamedEntityExtractor, SentenceTransformersDiversityRanker and LocalWhisperTranscriber to allow None as a valid value for device when deserializing from a YAML file. This allows a deserialized pipeline to auto-determine what device to use using the ComponentDevice.resolve_device logic.
-   Fix the broken serialization of HuggingFaceAPITextEmbedder, HuggingFaceAPIDocumentEmbedder, HuggingFaceAPIGenerator, and HuggingFaceAPIChatGenerator.
-   Fix <span class="title-ref">NamedEntityExtractor</span> crashing in Python 3.12 if constructed using a string backend argument.
-   Fixed the PdfMinerToDocument converter's outputs to be properly wired up to 'documents'.
-   Add <span class="title-ref">to_dict</span> method to <span class="title-ref">DocumentRecallEvaluator</span> to allow proper serialization of the component.
-   Improves/fixes type serialization of PEP 585 types (e.g. list\[Document\], and their nested version). This improvement enables better serialization of generics and nested types and improves/fixes matching of list\[X\] and List\[X\] types in component connections after serialization.
-   Fixed (de)serialization of NamedEntityExtractor. Includes updated tests verifying these fixes when NamedEntityExtractor is used in pipelines.
-   The <span class="title-ref">include_outputs_from</span> parameter in <span class="title-ref">Pipeline.run</span> correctly returns outputs of components with multiple outputs.
-   Return an empty list of answers when <span class="title-ref">ExtractiveReader</span> receives an empty list of documents instead of raising an exception.
