---
title: Haystack 2.5.0
description: Release notes for Haystack 2.5.0
toc: True
date: 2024-09-04
last_updated: 2024-09-04
tags: ["Release Notes"]
link: https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack/releases/tag/v2.5.0
---

### â¬†ï¸ Upgrade Notes

- Removed `ChatMessage.to_openai_format` method. Use `haystack.components.generators.openai_utils._convert_message_to_openai_format` instead.
- Removed unused `debug` parameter from `Pipeline.run` method.
- Removed deprecated `SentenceWindowRetrieval`. Use `SentenceWindowRetriever` instead.

### ðŸš€ New Features

- Added the unsafe argument to enable behavior that could lead to remote code execution in `ConditionalRouter` and `OutputAdapter`. By default, unsafe behavior is disabled, and users must explicitly set `unsafe=True` to enable it. When unsafe is enabled, types such as `ChatMessage`, `Document`, and `Answer` can be used as output types. We recommend enabling unsafe behavior only when the Jinja template source is trusted. For more information, see the documentation for [`ConditionalRouter`](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/conditionalrouter#unsafe-behaviour) and [`OutputAdapter`](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/outputadapter#unsafe-behaviour).

### âš¡ï¸ Enhancement Notes

- Adapts how `ChatPromptBuilder` creates `ChatMessages`. Messages are deep copied to ensure all meta fields are copied correctly.
- The parameter, `min_top_k`, has been added to the `TopPSampler`. This parameter sets the minimum number of documents to be returned when the top-p sampling algorithm selects fewer documents than desired. Documents with the next highest scores are added to meet the minimum. This is useful when guaranteeing a set number of documents to pass through while still allowing the Top-P algorithm to determine if more documents should be sent based on scores.
- Introduced a utility function to deserialize a generic Document Store from the `init_parameters` of a serialized component.
- Refactor `deserialize_document_store_in_init_parameters` to clarify that the function operates in place and does not return a value.
- The `SentenceWindowRetriever` has now an extra output key containing all the documents belonging to the context window.

### âš ï¸ Deprecation Notes

- The default model for `OpenAIGenerator` and `OpenAIChatGenerator`, previously 'gpt-3.5-turbo', will be replaced by 'gpt-4o-mini'.

### ðŸ› Bug Fixes

- Fixed an issue where page breaks were not being extracted from DOCX files.
- Used a forward reference for the `Paragraph` class in the `DOCXToDocument` converter to prevent import errors.
- The metadata produced by `DOCXToDocument` component is now JSON serializable. Previously, it contained `datetime` objects automatically extracted from DOCX files, which are not JSON serializable. These `datetime` objects are now converted to strings.
- Starting from `haystack-ai==2.4.0`, Haystack is compatible with `sentence-transformers>=3.0.0`; earlier versions of `sentence-transformers` are not supported. We have updated the test dependencies and LazyImport messages to reflect this change.
- For components that support multiple Document Stores, prioritize using the specific `from_dict` class method for deserialization when available. Otherwise, fall back to the generic `default_from_dict` method. This impacts the following generic components: `CacheChecker`, `DocumentWriter`, `FilterRetriever`, and `SentenceWindowRetriever`.
