---
title: Haystack 2.7.0
description: Release notes for Haystack 2.7.0
toc: True
date: 2024-11-11
last_updated: 2024-11-11
tags: ["Release Notes"]
link: https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack/releases/tag/v2.7.0
---

# Release Notes

### ✨ Highlights

#### 🚅 Rework `Pipeline.run()` logic to better handle cycles

`Pipeline.run()` internal logic has been heavily reworked to be more robust and reliable than before. This new implementation makes it easier to run `Pipeline`s that have cycles in their graph. It also fixes some corner cases in `Pipeline`s that don't have any cycle.

#### 📝 Introduce `LoggingTracer`

With the new `LoggingTracer`, users can inspect in the logs everything that is happening in their Pipelines in real time. This feature aims to improve the user experience during experimentation and prototyping.

### ⬆️ Upgrade Notes

- Removed `Pipeline` init argument `debug_path`. We do not support this anymore.

- Removed `Pipeline` init argument `max_loops_allowed`. Use `max_runs_per_component` instead.

- Removed `PipelineMaxLoops` exception. Use `PipelineMaxComponentRuns` instead.

- The deprecated default converter class `haystack.components.converters.pypdf.DefaultConverter` used by `PyPDFToDocument` has been removed.

  Pipeline YAMLs from `haystack<2.7.0` that use the default converter must be updated in the following manner:

  ```yaml
  # Old
  components:
      Comp1:
      init_parameters:
          converter:
          type: haystack.components.converters.pypdf.DefaultConverter
      type: haystack.components.converters.pypdf.PyPDFToDocument

  # New
  components:
      Comp1:
      init_parameters:
          converter: null
      type: haystack.components.converters.pdf.PDFToTextConverter
  ```

  Pipeline YAMLs from `haystack<2.7.0` that use custom converter classes can be upgraded by simply loading them with `haystack==2.6.x` and saving them to YAML again.

- `Pipeline.connect()` will now raise a `PipelineConnectError` if `sender` and `receiver` are the same Component. We do not support this use case anymore.

### 🚀 New Features

- Added component `StringJoiner` to join strings from different components to a list of strings.

- Improved serialization/deserialization errors to provide extra context about the delinquent components when possible.

- Enhanced DOCX converter to support table extraction in addition to paragraph content. The converter supports both CSV and Markdown table formats, providing flexible options for representing tabular data extracted from DOCX documents.

- Added a new parameter `additional_mimetypes` to the FileTypeRouter component.

  This allows users to specify additional MIME type mappings, ensuring correct

  file classification across different runtime environments and Python versions.

- Introduce a `LoggingTracer`, that sends all traces to the logs.

  It can enabled as follows:

  ```python
  import logging
  from haystack import tracing
  from haystack.tracing.logging_tracer import LoggingTracer

  logging.basicConfig(format="%(levelname)s - %(name)s -  %(message)s", level=logging.WARNING)
  logging.getLogger("haystack").setLevel(logging.DEBUG)
  tracing.tracer.is_content_tracing_enabled = True # to enable tracing/logging content (inputs/outputs)
  tracing.enable_tracing(LoggingTracer())
  ```

- Fundamentally rework the internal logic of `Pipeline.run()`. The rework makes it more reliable and covers more use cases. We fixed some issues that made `Pipeline`s with cycles unpredictable and with unclear Components execution order.

- Each tracing span of a component run is now attached with the pipeline run span object. This allows users to trace the execution of multiple pipeline runs concurrently.

### ⚡️ Enhancement Notes

- Add `streaming_callback` run parameter to `HuggingFaceAPIGenerator` and `HuggingFaceLocalGenerator` to allow users to pass a callback function that will be called after each chunk of the response is generated.
- The `SentenceWindowRetriever` now supports the `window_size` parameter at run time, overwriting the value set in the constructor.
- Add output type validation in `ConditionalRouter`. Setting `validate_output_type` to `True` will enable a check to verify if the actual output of a route returns the declared type. If it doesn't match a `ValueError` is raised.
- Reduced `numpy` usage to speed up imports.
- Improved file type detection in `FileTypeRouter`, particularly for Microsoft Office file formats like .docx and .pptx. This enhancement ensures more consistent behavior across different environments, including AWS Lambda functions and systems without pre-installed office suites.
- The `FiletypeRouter` now supports passing metadata (`meta`) in the `run` method. When metadata is provided, the sources are internally converted to `ByteStream` objects and the metadata is added. This new parameter simplifies working with preprocessing/indexing pipelines.
- `SentenceTransformersDocumentEmbedder` now supports `config_kwargs` for additional parameters when loading the model configuration
- `SentenceTransformersTextEmbedder` now supports `config_kwargs` for additional parameters when loading the model configuration
- Previously, `numpy` was pinned to `<2.0` to avoid compatibility issues in several core integrations. This pin has been removed, and haystack can work with both `numpy` `1.x` and `2.x`. If necessary, we will pin `numpy` version in specific core integrations that require it.

### ⚠️ Deprecation Notes

- The `DefaultConverter` class used by the `PyPDFToDocument` component has been deprecated. Its functionality will be merged into the component in 2.7.0.

### 🐛 Bug Fixes

- Serialized data of components are now explicitly enforced to be one of the following basic Python datatypes: `str`, `int`, `float`, `bool`, `list`, `dict`, `set`, `tuple` or `None`.
- Addressed an issue where certain file types (e.g., .docx, .pptx) were incorrectly classified as 'unclassified' in environments with limited MIME type definitions, such as AWS Lambda functions.
- Fixes logs containing JSON data getting lost due to string interpolation.
- Use forward references for Hugging Face Hub types in the `HuggingFaceAPIGenerator` component to prevent import errors.
- Fix the serialization of `PyPDFToDocument` component to prevent the default converter from being serialized unnecessarily.
- Revert change to `PyPDFConverter` that broke the deserialization of pre `2.6.0` YAMLs.
