---
title: Haystack 2.8.0
description: Release notes for Haystack 2.8.0
featured_image: /images/release-notes.png
images: ["/images/release-notes.png"]
toc: True
date: 2024-12-05
last_updated: 2024-12-05
tags: ["Release Notes"]
link: https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack/releases/tag/v2.8.0
---

# Release Notes

## ⬆️  Upgrade Notes

-   Remove `is_greedy` deprecated argument from `@component` decorator. Change the `Variadic` input of your Component to `GreedyVariadic` instead.

## 🚀 New Features

-   We've added a new [`DALLEImageGenerator`](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/dalleimagegenerator) component, bringing image generation with OpenAI's DALL-E to the Haystack
    -   **Easy to Use**: Just a few lines of code to get started:  
        ```python 
        from haystack.components.generators import DALLEImageGenerator 
        
        image_generator = DALLEImageGenerator() 
        response = image_generator.run("Show me a picture of a black cat.") 
        print(response) 
        ```
-   Add warning logs to the `PDFMinerToDocument` and `PyPDFToDocument` to indicate when a processed PDF file has no content. This can happen if the PDF file is a scanned image. Also added an explicit check and warning message to the `DocumentSplitter` that warns the user that empty Documents are skipped. This behavior was already occurring, but now its clearer through logs that this is happening.
-   We have added a new `MetaFieldGroupingRanker` component that reorders documents by grouping them based on metadata keys. This can be useful for pre-processing Documents before feeding them to an LLM.
-   Added a new `store_full_path` parameter to the `__init__` methods of the following converters:
`JSONConverter`, `CSVToDocument`, `DOCXToDocument`, `HTMLToDocument` `MarkdownToDocument`, `PDFMinerToDocument`, `PPTXToDocument`, `TikaDocumentConverter`, `PyPDFToDocument` , `AzureOCRDocumentConverter` and `TextFileToDocument`. The default value is `True`, which stores full file path in the metadata of the output documents. When set to `False`, only the file name is stored.
-   When making function calls via `OpenAPI`, allow both switching SSL verification off and specifying a certificate authority to use for it.
-   Add TTFT (Time-to-First-Token) support for OpenAI generators. This captures the time taken to generate the first token from the model and can be used to analyze the latency of the application.
-   Added a new option to the required_variables parameter to the `PromptBuilder` and `ChatPromptBuilder`. By passing `required_variables="*"` you can automatically set all variables in the prompt to be required.


## ⚡️ Enhancement Notes

-   Across Haystack codebase, we have replaced the use of `ChatMessage` data class constructor with specific class methods (`ChatMessage.from_user`, `ChatMessage.from_assistant`, etc.).
- Added the Maximum Margin Relevance (MMR) strategy to the `SentenceTransformersDiversityRanker`. MMR scores are calculated for each document based on their relevance to the query and diversity from already selected documents.
-   Introduces optional parameters in the `ConditionalRouter` component, enabling default/fallback routing behavior when certain inputs are not provided at runtime. This enhancement allows for more flexible pipeline configurations with graceful handling of missing parameters.
-   Added split by line to `DocumentSplitter`, which will split the document at n.
-   Change `OpenAIDocumentEmbedder` to keep running if a batch fails embedding. Now OpenAI returns an error we log that error and keep processing following batches.
-   Added new initialization parameters to the `PyPDFToDocument` component to customize the text extraction process from PDF files.
-   Replace usage of `ChatMessage.content` with `ChatMessage.text` across the codebase. This is done in preparation for the removal of `content` in Haystack 2.9.0.

## ⚠️ Deprecation Notes

-   The default value of the `store_full_path` parameter in converters will change to `False` in Haysatck 2.9.0 to enhance privacy.
-   In Haystack 2.9.0, the `ChatMessage` data class will be refactored to make it more flexible and future-proof. As part of this change, the <span class="title-ref">content</span> attribute will be removed. A new `text` property has been introduced to provide access to the textual value of the `ChatMessage`. To ensure a smooth transition, start using the `text` property now in place of `content`.
-   The `converter` parameter in the `PyPDFToDocument` component is deprecated and will be removed in Haystack 2.9.0. For in-depth customization of the conversion process, consider implementing a custom component. Additional high-level customization options will be added in the future.
- The output of `context_documents` in `SentenceWindowRetriever` will change in the next release. Instead of a List[List[Document]], the output will be a List[Document], where the documents are ordered by `split_idx_start`.


### 🐛 Bug Fixes

-   Fix `DocumentCleaner` not preserving all `Document` fields when run

-   Fix `DocumentJoiner` failing when ran with an empty list of Documents

-   For the `NLTKDocumentSplitter` we are updating how chunks are made when splitting by word and sentence boundary is respected. Namely, to avoid fully subsuming the previous chunk into the next one, we ignore the first sentence from that chunk when calculating sentence overlap. i.e. we want to avoid cases of `Doc1 = [s1, s2], Doc2 = [s1, s2, s3]`.

-    Finished adding function support for this component by updating the `_split_into_units` function and added the `splitting_function` `init` parameter.

-   Add specific `to_dict` method to overwrite the underlying one from `DocumentSplitter`. This is needed to properly save the settings of the component to yaml.

-   Fix `OpenAIChatGenerator` and `OpenAIGenerator` crashing when using a <span class="title-ref">streaming_callback</span> and `generation_kwargs` contain `{"stream_options": {"include_usage": True}}`.

-   Fix tracing `Pipeline` with cycles to correctly track components execution

-   When meta is passed into `AnswerBuilder.run()`, it is now merged into `GeneratedAnswer` meta

-   Fix `DocumentSplitter` to handle custom `splitting_function` without requiring `split_length.` Previously the `splitting_function` provided would not override other settings.

